---
layout: post
title: "OOP"
date: 2023-03-29
description: "OOP"
tag: Java Core
---
# OOP

Object-oriented programming aims to implement real-world entities, the main aim is to bind together the data and functions that operate on them so that no other part of the code can access this data except that function.

## Inheritance

- **Inheritance** Derive something specific from something generic, a class can inherit all properties and methods of another class and add its own modification

  Use Extend keywords to declare inheritance, inheritance in Java implies that there is an IS-A relationship between the classes.

  Type: single, multiple, multilevel, hierarchical, hybrid. Java doesn’t support Multiple inheritance

- <span style="color:red"> **Diamond Problem**</span> When two classes inherit from the same class, and a third class inherits from both the two classes, the third class will have two copies of all the data members of the base class, which leads to ambiguity.

  Java solves this problem by using

  1. interfaces: which is a collection of abstract methods and static constants.
  2. aggregation: We can also use aggregation to include objects of multiple classes within its own implementation. This allows the class to access the methods and properties of the aggregated objects without directly inheriting from them, thus avoiding the conflicts and ambiguities of multiple inheritance.

## Encapsulation

- **Encapsulation** is a mechanism of wrapping the data (variables) and code acting on the data (methods) together as a single unit. In encapsulation, the variables of a class will be hidden from other classes, and can be accessed only through the methods of their current class. Therefore, it is also known as data hiding.

  To achieve encapsulation in Java:

  1. Declare the variables of a class as private.
  2. Provide public setter and getter methods to modify and view the variables values.

  Example: reflection in Java

## Polymorphism

- **Polymorphism** means the ability to take more than one form. In Java, polymorphism allows us to access an object in multiple ways, such as:

  1. Method overloading
  2. Method overriding
  3. Operator overloading

  <span style="color:red">**Method overloading**</span> is a feature that allows a class to have more than one method having the same name, if their argument lists are different. It is similar to constructor overloading in Java, that allows a class to have more than one constructor having different argument lists.

  <span style="color:red">**Method overriding**</span> means to override a method in a subclass. It is used to provide the specific implementation of a method which is already provided by its superclass.

  **Operator overloading** is a feature that allows Java programmers to redefine the implementation of an operator (such as +, -, \*, /, %) for user-defined classes.

## Abstraction

- **Abstraction** is a process of hiding the implementation details and showing only functionality to the user. Another way, it shows only essential things to the user and hides the internal details. It is also used at high level design phase where the actual software is not available.

  In Java, abstraction is achieved by interfaces and abstract classes. We can achieve 100% abstraction using interfaces.

  <span style="color:red">**Difference between interface and abstract class:**</span>

  **Abstract class** in Java is a class which is declared using abstract keyword. It can have abstract and non-abstract methods (method with the body).

  **Interface** in Java is a blueprint of a class. It has static constants and abstract methods only. (after Java 8, it can have default and static methods also). All the methods of interfaces are public and abstract by default. We can’t create instance of interfaces.
